Monitoring is the process of gathering application front-end or back-end measurement data to diagnose, prevent or recover from application errors. (Tamburri, 2020) During this process, the application itself or programs associated with the application observe, collect and send data that describes how the application is running.

This monitoring can include everything from logs of unrecoverable catastrophic errors to day-to-day ordinary traces that detail regular code execution. As such, logs are usually assigned severity levels. In the mostly commonly used scheme, the severity

Traces or logs are pieces of text that detail the current state of the system, such as the current working state of the application - values of variables, thread count and load currently placed upon the application.

These traces can often be critical in the diagnostics after a system failure - why did the application crash and under what circumstances? Such crashes can be catastrophic for business - an e-shop may lose hundreds of thousands in revenue for every minute it is offline and unavailable to its customers. As such, it is essential to get the business up and running as soon as possible, which requires the developer to figure out what is wrong with the current system and how to fix it. For this diagnostic, logs are irreplaceable and very often offer the first clues for the fix.

Monitoring also allows the business to notice anything has gone wrong. As detailed in chapter 1.2.2 Knight Capital, a company can lose half a billion dollars in an hour because of a rudimentary bug. To prevent such a catastrophic loss, it is necessary for companies to have proper alert systems in place.

The developers responsible for keeping the software up and running are automatically paged or sent a message as soon as the system starts reporting anomalous values. An example of problems a software application might face when running:

·         Critical errors stop code execution
·         Output values are not as expected
·         Load placed on the infrastructure is too high
·         Servers stop responding
·         Website is unreachable